Allow custom bucket boundaries per Histogram (#300)
alcionai/clues: ctats/README.md

of potential conflicts altogether. What, would you prefer that we
panic?

## Corner Case: histogram bucket definitions
## Histogram bucket boundaries

You can't define your histogram buckets with Ctats. Why? Because

> [OTEL doesn't let you define them at runtime either](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/issues/3826).

Reviewer: Did they finally fix that?  Wonderful!

Author: Looks like it 🤷

> 

Reviewer: Either we should not define our own "default", or we should tell users about our default bucket size, and ignore the OTEL defaults.

Author: See here for the discussion on defaults https://github.com/alcionai/clues/pull/300#discussion_r3139050530

Boundaries can be passed to the OTel SDK at instrument creation time.
They take effect only when **no matching View** has been configured on the
`MeterProvider`; a View always takes precedence (per the OTel spec).

Pass `WithBoundaries` when constructing a histogram to supply
[explicit bucket boundaries](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/sdk/#explicit-bucket-histogram-aggregation):

`ctats.DefaultLatencyBoundariesMs` provides 20 logarithmically-spaced buckets from

> **1 to 60,000**. This is suitable for measuring latencies in milliseconds up to 60 seconds, with finer resolution and the low end of the range.

Reviewer: This reads like ai output; it's too focused on the technical details and tells no story.  Check out the tone of the other docs.  I'd like to keep with a human feel.

Author: Yes, updated. I cannot quite reproduce your brilliant style but at least we have a story (AI assist for grammar :D)

Reviewer: haha, thanks, I appreciate it.

```go
ctats.Histogram[int64](
    "op.latency_ms",
    ctats.WithBoundaries(ctats.DefaultLatencyBoundariesMs...),
).Record(ctx, elapsed)
```

Use `ExponentialBoundaries(min, max float64, count int)` to generate

> logarithmically-spaced buckets between any min/max with any resolution:

Reviewer: suggestion, add an example for registering the histogram first so that users know they can declare the boundaries once up front and use the metric through their code without worrying about it afterward.

```go
boundaries := ctats.ExponentialBoundaries(1, 120_000, 30)

ctats.Histogram[int64](
    "op.latency_ms",
    ctats.WithBoundaries(boundaries...),
).Record(ctx, elapsed)
```

### Future: automatic exponential histograms

The better long-term solution might be
[`AggregationBase2ExponentialHistogram`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.opentelemetry.io/otel/sdk/metric#AggregationBase2ExponentialHistogram)
— it auto-scales and has no ceiling. However, the
Elasticsearch [`exponential_histogram`](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/exponential-histogram)
field type does **not yet support the `percentiles` aggregation**. Until ES ships that support, explicit bucket boundaries remain

> the only viable approach for percentile queries in Kibana.

Reviewer: Don't add future cases to the readme, please.  We're not making any commitments here.

of potential conflicts altogether. What, would you prefer that we
panic?

## Histograms

Histograms are a bit more work than the other types because you have to think
about your data's distribution first. This is because the OTEL histograms
store observations in pre-defined buckets. The default boundaries top out at

> **10,000** — anything above that disappears into an overflow bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Histograms can be a bit more work than the other types because you have to think
about your data's distribution ahead of time.  Sure, you can run with whatever
OTEL uses as the default (15 buckets, scaling exponentially up to 10000), but is that
really the best showcase for your data?  Probably not.
```

[This explainer](https://signoz.io/blog/opentelemetry-histogram/) is a good read

> if you want a deeper understanding of OTEL Histograms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you're new to all this business,
[here's a good read](https://signoz.io/blog/opentelemetry-histogram/)
to catch you up with how histograms work under the hood.
```

However, the `ctats` API is just as easy to use as other metric types. The
cleanest solution is to declare your histogram at startup with

> `RegisterHistogram`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, how do you set yourself up for histogram success using ctats?
Just register your buckets on init!  Simple as that.
```

```go
func main() {
  ctx, err := ctats.RegisterHistogram(
    ctx,
    "op.latency",
    "ms",
    "End-to-end operation latency.",
    ctats.WithBoundaries(ctats.PresetLatencyBoundariesMs...),
  )
}

func handler(ctx context.Context) {
  ctats.Histogram[int64]("op.latency").Record(ctx, elapsed)
}
```

> Still optional though. Pass `WithBoundaries` directly to the `Histogram`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Registering is optional. You can also pass `WithBoundaries` directly to the
```

factory and the instrument is created on the first `Record` call. Just keep
in mind that the first creation wins — if the same id was already registered
or recorded against with different boundaries, the new ones are silently

> ignored. Again, would you prefer that we panic?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ignored.
```

### Picking your boundaries

For latency in milliseconds, `PresetLatencyBoundariesMs` is a sensible
default: 15 logarithmically-spaced buckets from **1 ms to 60,000 ms**, with
finer resolution at the low end where most data clusters.

If your data has a different shape, use `ExponentialBoundaries` to generate
your own range. Note that `min` must be greater than zero — the boundaries
are log-spaced so zero has no meaningful place in the range:

```go
// background job duration in seconds: expected to time out at 1 hour
boundaries := ctats.ExponentialBoundaries(1, 3_600, 10)

ctats.Histogram[int64](
    "job.duration",
    ctats.WithBoundaries(boundaries...),
).Record(ctx, elapsed)

> ```

Reviewer: This will need to get updated, per the other conversation.

## Which metric type should I use?

Feeling overwhelmed?  Not sure which type to pick?  Just answer
these simple questions and you'll be a master in no time!

* Sum -> OTEL Counter
* Counter -> OTEL UpDownCounter
* Gauge -> OTEL Gauge (who knew?)

> * Histogram -> OTEL Histogram

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Histogram -> OTEL Histogram (surprise!)
```
